# GenMetrics

Runtime metrics for GenServer and GenStage applications.

This library supports the collection and publication of GenServer and GenStage runtime metrics. Metrics data are generated by an introspection agent. No instrumentation is required within the GenServer or GenStage library or within your application source code.

## Documentation

Find detailed documentation for the GenMetrics library on [HexDocs](https://hexdocs.pm/gen_stage).

## Installation

GenStage requires Elixir v1.4. Just add `:gen_metrics` to your list of dependencies in mix.exs:

```elixir
def deps do
  [{:gen_metrics, "~> 0.1.0"}]
end
```

## Examples

Examples using GenMetrics to collect and report runtime metrics for GenServer applications can be found in the [examples](examples) directory:

  * [genserver_events](examples/genserver_events.exs)

Examples using GenMetrics to collect and report runtime metrics for GenStage applications can also be found in the [examples](examples) directory:

  * [genstage_producer_consumer](examples/genstage_producer_consumer.exs)

  * [genstage_gen_event](examples/genstage_gen_event.exs)

  * [genstage_rate_limiter](examples/genstage_rate_limiter.exs)

All of these GenStage example applications are clones of the example applications provided in the [GenStage](http://github.com/elixir-lang/gen_stage) project repository.

## License

Copyright 2017, David Russell

Licensed under the Apache License, Version 2.0 (the "License");
you may not use this file except in compliance with the License.
You may obtain a copy of the License at

   http://www.apache.org/licenses/LICENSE-2.0

Unless required by applicable law or agreed to in writing, software
distributed under the License is distributed on an "AS IS" BASIS,
WITHOUT WARRANTIES OR CONDITIONS OF ANY KIND, either express or implied.
See the License for the specific language governing permissions and
limitations under the License.
